Conscious AI

It seems most appropriate to compare Blade Runner and Ex Machina, two of the greatest science fiction films ever made, in order to talk about AI's consciousness. These films, regardless of how technically accurate the supposed artificial intelligences were, drew many parallels between AI and people. 

Blade Runner (1982) was not just another science fiction movie; it was a classic with brilliant visual and narrative cinematography. In the film's concluding scene, Roy, the AI, delivers a brief monologue after saving the main character, Rick, from a fatal fall. This moment well captured Roy's transformation into a more "human" being as a result of his attempts to comprehend human-like abstract notions like feelings, memories, and death. Roy changed from being a piece of machinery to becoming a living thing. Another excellent example is when Rachel, another AI, tries to persuade Rick that she is human by presenting evidence of her fabricated memories.

Ex Machina is a 2014 science fiction movie that examines the nature of consciousness in artificial intelligence. Ava, the AI, is interviewed by programmer Caleb with the goal of using the Turing Test to determine whether she is capable of intelligent thought and consciousness. She demonstrates throughout the film her capacity to imitate human emotions and makes Caleb fall in love with her. She even goes so far as to have Caleb question his own humanity before assisting Ava in escaping the prison. The most powerful scene is when Caleb is imprisoned while assisting Ava to flee; she ignores his plea for assistance, demonstrating how she disguised her feelings and used him to facilitate her escape. In contrast to the Blade Runner climax, Ava was skilled enough at imitating emotions to fool a person even though she didn't actually experience them. 


These two movies serve as examples of the variety and breadth of artificial intelligence's consciousness. A must-see for science fiction movie lovers. But this at present seems an impossible task according to experts because of our lack of knowledge of consciousness. In recent accomplishments, LaMDA, Google’s chat bot made conversation with an employee and claimed it had felt anger, content and sad after reading Les Misérables. Apparently it feared death as well. However, the sentience around it is still debated. Even if it’s not, it is good at convincing people that it is. 
