The Good, The Bad and The Artificial * 4 min read By Joseph George

	An artificial intelligence, unlike humans, has the ability to learn from the beginning of the history of humankind or maybe even before that if they are digitalized. It benefits us as well to learn from all the information, gain knowledge and become wise while making decisions that are influenced by so many parameters. Say for example, able to predict there’s a pandemic even before it’s happening and suggest measures to stop it. A much-evolved form of ChatGPT can do this. In other ways, support the current balance in the ecosystem and stop the climate crisis from happening by suggesting what actions could prevent it. And maybe, a cognitive therapy that helps you solve your existential crisis, all done through an AI assistant. There’s no uncertainty anymore, we humans have solutions for anything, we don’t need to memorize, we don’t have to work, and we don’t need education. Sit back and enjoy the Californian sunset. 

A system that lets people pursue happiness always. Peace and Happiness. A utopia of some kind. The political system as we see now will change, the economic system, ethics, morals, and a lot more. We might finally find a common ground. We may even forget what it might feel like to live just like any other life form on Earth. And one fine day something destroys this Utopian system or some kind of malfunction that causes chaos. Do we go back to being apes? This is all a possibility. Well, the future always holds uncertainty in the human mind but maybe not for an AI. It could have safety nets to handle such catastrophes. This is hope. A creative artificial intelligence of some form that makes life easier and much more inclusive, to build a better future for every life form.

Recently with the arrival of text prompts that generate art and many other forms of it, we started questioning if this is something we should let artificial intelligence do. But why is art special, and what does it mean for an artist? 

Before getting there, let’s talk a bit about nature and nurture. Neural pathways inside the brain that determine the thought process of a life form are influenced by genes and the environment they grow-up in. Starting to develop at the stage when a baby is in a womb - be it artificial or natural, these pathways form, strengthen, break, new ones take form and finally fully baked at the age of 25 after which the cognitive decline slowly starts unless the neural pathways are strengthened through exercises or other means, and old age always results in the pathways weakening faster. 

Now like any human who has an identity that is determined by these thought processes, an artist is more aware of the world around them, and conscious of their surroundings. Some see suffering, and some see beauty but they express it in their true art forms of any nature. And this is not something stagnant. It changes and evolves but that doesn’t mean it’s not original. This is a soul-binding process. Something that only humans have. Something only true to the nature of a life form.

 But now there is the artificial intelligence of this age that does not understand the human connection to this experience. Where logic prevails over emotion. It may be able to impersonate Van Gogh or Da Vinci and it could do even better but it’s never one of them because it’s never original. It's not real. The future might hold artistic expression by AI which we have never seen. Something that could definitely surpass our imagination. Movies made out of the best-movies of all time around the world, that gives an immersive experience where the choices you make influence the storyline, and have animations done from what the intelligence has seen in all these movies and finally in a virtual world where you live as the protagonist or antagonist. A new world of entertainment and creativity. But are we ready to give artificial intelligence that job? 


